Excellent.
We're back now at 1 1 30.
Um, so we'll move to our next, uh, submitter.
Um, who's TE ato?
Sorry, I probably have but the pronunciation of that,
but if they're online,
um, brilliant.
I think it's, um, excellent. There. There we have it.
Welcome to the Health Sleep Committee. I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing this, uh,
subcommittee of the Health Sleep Committee.
Uh, we do have your written, written submission.
Uh, we have allocated 10 minutes for your oral presentation.
Um, we do have a number of members
of Health Select Committee here online, as well as
as the officials as well.
So I'll hand hand the time over to you now,
CEO of TA, trust
Practitioner.
Hello,
I'm Martin's Executive Assistant.
Um, this bill, um,
we believe it does not advance the PA healthy purchase and,
and instead increases the widening health inequities
and weakening Maori authority
and are undermining Maori health Inequities are well
documented and persist today on average, as we already know.
I don't need to know, um, present the numbers,
but Maori di seven years less than non-Maori, um,
preventable diseases like diabetes, cancer
and cardiovascular disease, barriers
to accessing healthcare costs
and literacy challenges and all of that.
Um, as a claim of the Y 2 57 5, I think I put Y 2 57 2 in
that thing, those in the health inequities, um,
persisted back in 2018.
The y the Pie Water Act, um, or the Crown
and the partnership with, um, the claimants was
around increasing access to healthcare
and reducing, um, barriers.
Our organization to how, if you feel, stands on
that platform where, um, we provide services
that would reduce inequities, um, provide access
to medications, resources.
Um, as, as you know, we've got housing shortages,
we've got social issues, um, and the list goes on.
Um, but embedded in, into the healthcare system
to remove this would be wrong,
but not only that would also take out the ana, the MA Maori,
um, and the Rii principles.
Um, rii obligations throughout the bill are quite clear,
have been repealed, repealed,
the Maori health authority has been reduced
and the equity principles have been repealed.
The impacts of this bill has passed.
Um, Maori Bo voices will become advisory only
and not decision partners.
Uh, treaty obligations will be weakened and, and re
and repeating the crown's failures within the Y 5 2 7 5,
the health and will deepen
as Maori needs are no longer prioritized.
Um, we are a Copa Maori lead service
and under, it may lead to Underfund Fund.
Um, I guess as a call to action to,
to present ourselves today, um, to say
that we do have some concerns around if the, um,
the bill was passed that to take out the treaty
and the principles that were formed from the Y 2 5 7 5, um,
and other platform for better health, not only for Maori,
but for all New Zealanders.
And what guarantee do we have that, um, inequities
and disparities will be continued,
will be addressed if the bill is passed.
Excellent. Okay. Thank you for that.
I'll just see if any
of the committee members have any questions they,
they would like to ask.
Uh, no, there doesn't, I,
there is just a couple minutes if there's anything else you
want to add or, um, I appreciate you've already, um,
have submitted, um, your, your written submission,
so no, no pressure there.
Um, but if every, everybody's happy. Okay. Brilliant.
Well, thank you very much for taking the time to come
and present to us.
Uh, we really do, do appreciate it, um,
and the, the time not only to be here,
but also for, um, the written document you provided as well.
So thank, thank you very, very much.
Uh, we, we now will move to, um,
our next submitter, which I do believe is,
um, to a tier limited.
Um, do we have Anthony online?
Excellent. Um, Anthony, welcome
to the Health Select Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing this session.
Um, we have your written, written submission, um,
and we have allocated 10 minutes
for your oral, oral presentation.
There's a number of health select c committee members online
as, as well as our officials.
Um, so I'll hand over the 10 minutes to you now.
Uh, Dr. Campbell,
I'm Royal.
I'm the CEO of two RT Limited,
and I might just start explaining a little bit about two rt.
I, I know at least one member
of your panel is very familiar.
Uh, Jenny, um, uh, she's very familiar with our work.
Um, but for the other members, uh,
I think it might be worthwhile just giving a a two minute,
um, background to us.
So, um, uh, we represent, uh, Maori in the technology
and telecommunication space.
Uh, we are a trust structure with a co,
with a commercial company, a number
of commercial companies over the top of it.
Um, we are formed out of the, um, discussions
that we have had over a lot of, um, years
with the government around access
to telecommunication spectrum.
Um, as you may know, our early attempts to try
and get access to Spectrum led to the
establishment was two degrees mobile.
Um, we established the Kaha Fund in the 2000 tens.
And then since 2019, we've been negotiating
with the government over, um, 5G Spectrum.
We formed the trust in 2020.
Uh, we are now gone from, um, one person in 2020.
We are well over a hundred people now.
Um, and our focus is on technology telecommunications.
We are a hundred percent owned by all Maori.
Um, so, uh, we are a trust structure, which, um,
returns benefits, um, back to all Maori through a series
of programs that we run called the Impact Programs,
which is about training and workforce development.
We are here today to advocate on behalf of Maori,
not specifically in the, um, health space,
but more from terms of our expertise in telecommunications.
And so our advocacy is really around how do we ensure
that our country
as a whole has the appropriate infrastructure in place
that allows us to deliver services, particularly to rural,
both, um, Maori
and non-Maori in those, um, places where
commercially it's not feasible to deliver services.
So that's our particular area of expertise
and, um, we would not talk on, um, on behalf of other Maori
who have expertise in the health sector.
Um, by the way, I am joined online here somewhere, uh,
with M McCallum, who is our chief policy advisor, uh,
who has been, uh, working with, uh,
officials on preparing a submission.
So, um, I, I think the key thing for us is around
advocating for telecommunications, uh,
to be not only accessible,
but also affordable with inside our rural areas.
Um, we have over many years advocated for, uh,
the government to both regulate
and to facilitate, um, delivery in these rural areas.
And there has been a number of successes over the years
after long periods of advocacy,
we've now seen the three mobile network operators, um, come
and, um, uh, provide, uh, connectivity through joint venture
through RCG.
We've seen a number of, um, government initiatives
through the rural broadband initiative into, um, uh,
organizations who support local communities
to deliver those, um, those services.
Now, we've seen technology change as well, so we have a lot
of, um, people using styling, uh, which in itself is a,
a challenge for us as a sovereign nation.
Uh, but none the least the technology has been useful.
We, um, we believe that a focus needs
to be continued on delivering, um,
world class infrastructure to our rural, uh, communities.
The fact that, um, starlink has arrived has been helpful,
but it is not the answer to many of our, uh, challenges.
So we would urge that, um,
health infrastructure needs to include robust
and resilient connectivity, um, throughout the country.
And, uh, so on one hand we have, um,
connectivity in rural areas, so that will enable things like
a high quality telehealth.
And as, um, as we continue
to develop services in those areas, the ability
to have high quality, low latency connectivity
is critically important.
Um, that's one part of it.
And the second part is that, um, our,
uh, infrastructure, our health infrastructure needs
to be interconnected.
We need to have mechanisms by which
our information is shared.
We have shared services throughout the country,
and that all of our key pieces of, um, health infrastructure
are enabled from a technology perspective.
Now, to that end, we as a company are, uh, prepared
and have been investing in developing technologies in
the health sector as well.
So we as an organization, intend to contribute
to making sure
that Maori has a place in providing health
technologies in the future.
So our, our, um, premises two things.
One is we need to make sure we don't leave our communities,
rural communities behind, particularly as more
and more how, uh, government services are move, moving on
to telecommunications and broadband.
Uh, and secondly, we need to make sure that all of our, um,
infrastructure that we do have as a national organization
is not only well connected,
but also has all of the, the infrastructure
that's necessary.
I'm one of the pieces of infrastructure
that we've developed over many years,
and I've worked on this personally, was the NHI, um,
project many years ago.
Um, I was, uh, working for, in the health sector trying
to get NHI down to the primary care level, uh,
which is where it needed to be
because that's where the most
of the interactions occur with our patients.
Those types of clearly national infrastructure projects need
to continue to be supported,
and they need to be supported over, um, high class, uh,
broadband and internet connectivity.
Um, I might just stop there
and just see whether Ani has anything else to add to that
before I see, uh, there's a hand up as well.
Bye-bye. Thank you. Thanks, Antonique.
Uh, Koto, I guess I just wanted to support that
by just reiterating that we are supportive of, uh,
a committee being set up,
but if there can be explicit inclusion
of digital infrastructure included into the, uh,
the definition of what that committee looks like
or the tour, um, you know, we wanna reiterate that,
you know, how the outcomes cannot be improved without
that digital connectivity piece.
And hospitals without broadband are kind of like, uh,
modern equivalent of clinics without
roads, I guess, to get there.
And there are opportunities in terms of isolated
and remote communities having potential with the potential
to have marae hubs set up
where they can better serve those small
and remote communities.
So I just wanted to, um,
Excellent, thank you. And I see
Jenny's got her hand up, Jenny,
Um, Kiata to you both.
Um, lovely to see you here in this forum.
Um, when we talk about fiber level service,
when we talk about fiber speeds
and the capacity to, to do health on, um,
out into our rural communities,
can you talk specifically about, um, the gaps
that you are seeing so that, you know,
whanau can access telehealth in a little rural community in
the Hooka or, um, on the West Coast.
What, what will that mean for them to be able
to actually have the connectivity?
And also in terms of, it's not how much data you have,
but what do you use your data for
and how, how is that conversation about
what do you use your data for going to, um,
create greater health outcomes in the health space?
Um, look, I think in the rural areas, if we had our way,
we would, um, in fact, we advocated for this back when the,
um, UFB was being considered by the government.
Uh, some years ago we had said,
why didn't you start from the outside in work inwards?
The urban areas are relatively easy, easy to, to deal with.
And we thought that the hard ones were going to be the,
the far flung reaches.
And so that's where, where we should start.
Now, we didn't quite achieve it,
but the concept is that we need to be thinking about
how we make sure we get, um,
connectivity route right out to the edges.
And so if we just take, uh, hook as an example, um,
there we did through RBI one, have a number
of initiatives in place to try and get, uh, fiber.
So fiber went out to the schools we were advocating for
to fiber to go out to other community institutions in those
areas, including not just schools, but all of the marai
and all of the healthcare, um, facilities as well.
And I think that, that those are still
key places for us to get to.
Now, we did get to schools and there is, uh,
there were two sets of fiber which were laid
to each school around the country.
Um, many of, there were two sec one set was for the school,
and the other set was for the community.
There are very few communities that have been actually been,
have managed to actually pick up
that other spares set of fiber.
So I, I think there's some unfinished business still
to do in that space.
And connecting, um, health centers as a, as a key part
of our community, I think is critically important.
Now, you might argue that well, look, look, fixed wireless,
uh, services are sufficient.
You know, our mobile connectivity is gonna be sufficient.
Um, I don't think that's the case.
I think that our technology over time will increase, will
continue to require higher quality speeds, not only in terms
of the volume of data you can put through it,
but the time that it takes to get from,
from one place and back again.
And fiber is the one that can deliver those kind
of, um, latencies.
Now that's important
because when you, uh, sitting in front of somebody,
it's really important to have a high quality.
If you do thinking about telehealth, it's important
to have a high quality picture.
Um, and that's just one very simple example,
and we've seen since COVID.
Yeah. Um, tha thanks Anthony.
We probably do need to, to to wrap it up. Wrap it up there.
Um, oh,
Look, you got me on a roll.
Yes, no, I, I do appreciate, uh, the unique perspective
that actually you've brought
to this submiss mission process.
So, so, so thank, thank, thank you very much.
Um, and also to Ani for coming online, uh, today.
So really, really do, do appreciate it.
Uh, we do have to move on to our next submitter,
which is the PSA Mental Health and Addictions Committee.
Um, so yeah, once again, thank,
thank you very much, Anthony.
Um, if, if you are, uh, if the PSA Mental Health
and Addiction Committee is online,
can you please accept the prompt to become a panelist?
Akira. Excellent. Welcome. Welcome, Andy.
Um, I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing the subcommittee
of the Health Seek Committee.
Uh, we do have your written, written submission.
Uh, we have allocated 10 minutes for your oral presentation.
Um, I'll hand the time to you now.
Thank you, Akira, everyone. My name's Andy Cowell.
I'm a PSA Delegate.
Uh, I work in community mental health
and, uh, in the Auckland region.
And Christie will introduce herself, uh, shortly.
First of all, I'll just do a brief introduction
and then, uh, I'll say a few words
and then Christie will speak,
and then hopefully if you wanna ask some questions,
we'll have some time at the end.
We are members of the PSA Mental Health
and Addictions Committee, representing thousands
of workers in the mental health services in New Health
New Zealand, to URA in the community
and in core public service agencies.
Our committee has a long history
of promoting a better health system for RA and workers.
We are gonna focus our submission today on the importance
of Tamma or the New Zealand Health Charter.
We need a joint up health system that supports the people
who work in it and re and removing Tamma.
Oranga is a massive step backwards.
The charter was developed through extensive consultation
with workers and unions.
It is the foundation for how we will provide healthcare
that is more responsive to the needs of
and accessible to all people living in New Zealand.
I've chosen to focus on Tonga, where the workforce
and their unions are meaningfully involved in decision
making and they're good working conditions,
so we can provide high quality services.
The proposal to get rid of the charter is a symptom
of this government's deliberate decision to underfund
and under-resourced mental health and addiction services.
The government's manufacture crisis in Health New Zealand.
So it doesn't care about publicly funded services.
The government says it doesn't want red tape.
So why does Health New Zealand have a ludicrous level
of bureaucracy in order to recruit?
Why are we waiting months for clinical frontline positions
to be approved and recruited into?
And while we are waiting for these positions to be filled,
we have an overworked
and stressed workforce expected to make complex
clinical decisions, decision decisions
that will significantly affect the wellbeing
of people in our communities who experience mental illness
while we having to turn up to work day in doubt.
Having to prioritize who we will treat
and support today based on an overstretch based on
overstretch resources rather than clinical judgment.
The government said it cares about
the mental wellbeing of people.
Why then has the government allowed the police to reduce
and cut their response
to attending mental health events without providing
additional resourcing
for the mental health and addiction workforce?
The result is vulnerable.
People require an immediate treatment
and support in hospital settings are left in the community
because the police are not available
or willing to assist the crisis team.
The flow on effect is staff are having
to manage a much higher level
of unwellness in the community.
This doesn't need to happen.
This decision has also resulted in clinical staff being put
more than ever at risk of harm by people
who are experienced acute mental distress and agitation.
I know in the last few months of a,
of a psychia psychiatrist being punched in the face
by a distressed patient in the community, a situation
where the police were asked to attend
but declined recently, a colleague
of mine was chased outta a patient's home by the patient
who was very threatening.
Last weekend, two staff were assorted
by a person in an acute mental health inpatient unit.
One of the staff was not able
to continue with their work for the day.
Why are we having to turn up to work each day?
Not known if we are going to be verbally
or physically threatened because we don't have the adequate
staffing and resources to manage
and support people in their
communities and in our hospitals.
And when the police are available
because of underfunding, we do not have the adequate numbers
of hospital beds available
because of underfunding where people
who need to be in hospital.
But instead of waiting hours in ED
and already overstretched service,
requiring already overworked nursing
and medical staff to be present, who would
otherwise be looking after
and supporting other patients requiring their input.
We are the experts in the field of mental health.
We need to be listened to.
We are saying maintain to Ma Rana
and give both us as workers
and Health New Zealand the opportunity to use the principles
of the charter to build a successful service
and support the most vulnerable citizens in our community.
Uh, I'll pass over to Christie now,
Uh, Koto.
Uh, my name is Christie
and I'm a mental house support worker based
in Inhi Christchurch.
Um, I work in a community organization, so part of the
C ps funded sector.
Um, I'm here on behalf of the, uh,
PSA Mental Health Injections Committee to speak on behalf
of the community funded sector.
Um, we oppose the changes to the Payor Act
and recommend that they do not proceed.
Timo, as Andy has discussed, is a commitment to a supportive
and positive working environment.
It enhances the opportunity to have the tools
and facilities to do the job well.
It came about through a wide range in consultation
and engagement with many different organizations.
Iwi, Maori providers, workers
and unions is something
that many workers have been excited about
as it would implement conditions that work
for the KA within the system.
One of the PO within this is waa, working with heart,
the strong sense of purpose
and commitment to service
that health workers bring to the mahi.
This is something that acknowledges the importance of us
as workers, being the experts in our fields.
We know how the services work,
and we know the shortcomings of the system.
This means we have the knowledge of what needs
to be different and can provide the information
and guidance on what that could look like.
We as workers see the impact that the system has on t order
and the difficulties we have in supporting them in a system
that does not work together, speaks
to the unique contributions of workers being valued,
respected, recognized and supported, and workers
and their unions being supported to use their voices
with confidence, knowing that they will be heard.
We as the workers in the system know what needs to happen.
And being involved in the processes
and developments of the system we work within would be
a benefit to everyone.
The removal of TRANGO would have a detrimental
impact on the health system.
It would see the demise of an already failing system
that does not work for the Kai Mahi,
nor the, it would have ongoing impacts
for the country as a whole.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much.
I see there's a couple of hands up.
Uh, we will go to Ingrid.
Thank you. Um, Cordura for your submission in terms of the
outcomes for tga faa, what is the worst case scenario
that you anticipate if this legislation goes ahead as it is?
And then secondly, what is your concern
for the mental health workforce in,
if it goes ahead as it's,
Um, I can a try and answer that.
I think they go hand in hand,
but they, um, my concern is
that the already stretched the system will
just continue to decline.
Um, it's hard to sort of imagine, um,
how it can get, uh,
but without sort of being, um, kind
of being too overstated, you know, uh, I'm concerned
for my colleagues, my members that I work
with for their safety.
Uh, but I also am really concerned for the, uh, PHI
who live in the communities who, uh, you know,
are really struggling from day after day.
You know, and we do our very best
to support them and to treat them.
And we do a great job for a lot of people,
but there are some people that we aren't able to help,
and we would be able to if we
have a properly funded service.
I, I think following on, oh, sorry.
That's alright. Sorry, I you go Chrisy.
Um, I think just following on from that,
the worst case scenario would be higher numbers
of deaths within the community,
within the mental health and addiction space.
Um, likely from suicide,
from overdose, um, and things like that.
And in terms of the workers, it would just see more
of the workers leaving the country
because it's just not a viable system
to continue to work within.
Ah, Ul uh, states the values
that we expect in the health, um, uh,
health workplaces.
And I'd like to understand from
your role in the PSA, uh, how that has been helpful
for holding people in the workplace
accountable for their behavior.
And I'm particularly thinking of instances there of,
of bullying or toxic behavior in the, in the workplace.
Uh, and how, how that's, how,
how has the charter been helpful?
Um, I think, I mean, I think, uh,
health New Zealand fat has done a good job in my sector
anyway, in terms of, uh, I'm trying to understand the, sort
of the situation we work in
and understand that, you know, people can't kind
of are on edge and if there are cases of bullies bullying,
they do have like a cult just culture
kind of approach to things.
So, you know, I mean, this is very general, so there's good
and bad within, uh, in the system.
I work area I work in, but generally, uh, the employer
and the workforce are able to sort of work together
around these kind of things.
There's an understanding that, uh, bullying, for example,
is not acceptable and that we are able
to sort of work through that.
And there's, uh, and the employer is very clear about that.
And obviously this is well supported
by unions in the workplace.
So that is a good example of
where something like the charter works really well.
And if I may, Mr. Chair, just, uh, one other,
have you ever seen bullying in a health workplace, uh,
negatively impact service provision for patients?
Uh, yes, of course. I mean, you know, happens.
That's right. Unfortunately.
Excellent. We, we do, we do need to move on.
Uh, we are moving on to another PSA group, um, the fatto,
um, oral health Sector committee.
Um, if they're online, if they could accept the prompt
to become panelists, that would be great.
After this, this group, we'll move back to, um, John
Gregson, uh, for his, his submission.
Excellent. We have Megan, uh, joining us online.
Megan, welcome to the
subcommittee of the Health State Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing this, this session.
Uh, we've just heard from some of your colleagues.
Um, we do have your written submission, um,
and we have allocated 10 minutes for your oral presentation.
Um, I'll hand that time over to you now.
Yeah, I just wanted to check. There is others on this.
Uh, I should have Diana and Janet.
Diana has popped up. Um, Yes, I'm here.
Yes. Excellent. Uh, and we've got Janet as well. Yes.
Um, and I think Diana's gonna start us off and we'll work.
Excellent. Yep. Thank you Megan.
Um, so Kira, we are from, uh,
the TE Health Sector Committee in the PSA.
Um, we represent over 25,000 health workers in
covering over 50, 70 different occupational groups.
Uh, our members work as mental health nurses
and assistants, public health nurses,
allied health administrative and clerical staff policy,
and other knowledge workers and managers.
And around 10% of our members are Maori.
Uh, my name is Diana, me, as you've seen, I'm one
of the co-conveners of the Health Sector Committee
and the vice President of the PSA.
My substantive role is a community occupational therapist
at UA MidCentral.
Uh, we oppose this bill
and we recommend that it does not proceed.
Uh, as health workers, we see the impact
of underfunding every day.
Uh, in my department alone, we have a high number
of vacancies and, um, I cannot remember the last time
that we were fully staffed.
Uh, this is reflective of departments across the country.
We believe the health system needs full funding
and not legislatively steps backwards.
We believe that many parts of the bill are a step backwards.
We oppose the removal of TE Maori rango, the removal
of commitments to Maori Health
and Equity, the removal
of commitments to preventative healthcare, the legislation
of targets and the minister having power
to take bargaining from our employer.
Um, I'll now hand back to my colleague Megan.
Thanks, Diana. Um, so hi everyone. My name is Megan Barry.
I'm a PSA delegate.
Um, but I've also got a background in mental health
and addictions nursing,
and I currently work
as a safe staffing program nurse manager at counties.
Man. Um, today I, I wanna speak
to you really about the importance.
I know you've just heard from our mental health
and addictions committee.
Um, but myself, Janet,
and Diana were part of the big working group
that spent a lot of after hours in our own time working
to develop this alongside Health New Zealand.
Um, so we have a strong passion for seeing it stay in there.
Um, so we've really had a, I mean, you all know,
but we've had a hard few years working in the house system
with COVID staffing shortages
and restructures of our health workers.
As health workers, we've been really involved in this
development and we're excited to see the possibility
and what we could create, uh, with this document
as a foundation document, uh, to the new Health New Zealand.
Uh, for me, one of the important parts of this document was,
um, the ability to have a clear guideline
for all levels of the house system.
So not just, you know, the frontline workers,
but it worked up right through the management structures,
um, to hold them accountable, not just have tokenistic uh,
values, but to have clear principles
and behaviors that underline the day-to-day work
that we have as healthcare professionals.
Secondly, it was around the commitment to the workers.
Again, not just a simple tokenistic gesture
of their participating.
It was a meaningful involvement
and engagement at all levels
with the workers and the unions.
Workers are the house system, and it's only
because we go to work each day, uh,
that everyone receives the care that they require.
Taking away the provision to support us, to keep doing
our work, um, in a safe way will harm the house system
and it will harm the workers.
Now I think I'm passing on to someone that's not on here.
I think Megan, you were passing on to Alan,
but he, we were told we were running a bit late,
so he may be a bit late,
but I'm quite happy to move on to the next part.
Kiara, um, I'm Janet Quigley
and I'm a health promotion advisor
with the National Public Health Service.
Um, but just a bit of background.
Um, I came from Oral health
and I've been working in the health sector for
probably longer than a number of you have been alive.
I've been here for 55 years nonstop.
But today I am talking about the importance prevention pays
in our health, um, system,
and the importance of retaining this as part
of the Piata Act.
Examples of some of the work that, uh, myself
and my colleagues are doing is around increasing, um,
awareness around alcohol harm reduction,
around improving food environments
and increasing physical activity,
which helps prevent obesity
and all the associated health issues that around this,
like heart disease, diabetes in the oral health area.
We are working really hard on caries prevention,
especially in my district with a shortage
of dental practitioners.
Um, we are doing this
by implementing daily toothbrushing into our priority
schools and CEEs alongside nutrition advice to parents
and our vulnerable groups and the smoke-free vape free area.
It's actually more effective for us to, um,
and co cost wise as well, to reduce our youth update
and vaping and smoking rather than sort
of supporting the people once they have started this.
So we put a lot of emphasis into that work.
And of course, one of the big ones is immunization, ensuring
that our most vulnerable people,
including our Tamari elderly
and those who are immunocompromised, are vaccinated.
We have Persis Whoing cough in our communities
with 3,268 cases so far
this year, and measles at 13 cases
and knowing more cases are just a plane right away.
I, for one, I'm old enough to remember when polio was
around something I never want to see again.
I lost my cousin to that.
So, you know, the PSAs, a union for public health
and strongly supports public
and preventable health approaches.
The health principles put legislative obligations
on health entities to take a preventative health approach.
Having those health principles
and legislation provides an opportunity for health entities
to be held accountable for those obligations.
Removing the health principles would be a backward
step in public health.
Skimping on public
and preventive health leads to huge costs
for people's health and
for the health system into our future.
In other high income notions,
the medium return on investment
for public health interventions is 14.3 to one.
In other words, we could be saving $14 30
for every dollar spent.
We should be as a health service fence at the top
of the cliff, not the ambulance at the bottom.
And we should be enabling communities
and supporting them to build resilience
and make choices that will improve their
long-term health outcomes.
So that's all I've got to say. So thank you for listening.
Excellent. I see that we've been joined by Alan Allen,
did you have something you wanted to add?
Oh, uh, my name's Alan Franks and I affiliate.
I'm a client of five 20 years service in Maori mental health
services, and I work at TE at tu to my Auckland.
Look, I just wanted to say there, to,
to repeal the health principles.
It will not be supportive to the commitments
that health services have made to work alongside Maori.
For this to happen to remove those principles,
those commitments to Maori is a disgrace.
That's all I can say about that.
Um, this legislation,
dismantles provisions aimed at improving body health
and addressing inequities.
That's what it was set for, the health principles.
Um, but then it's also limiting the role by dismantling the,
the health principles, dismantling, limiting the role
of the Maori Iwi Maori partnership boards,
getting rid of the health principles
and removing the requirements to know, especially about te,
which is our framework.
They, our measure for safety.
Um, this indicates a step backwards for all of us
to aka water was disestablished without a select
committee process.
So we weren't able to offer our opposition to that.
As health workers, we want
to address inequities, not entrench them.
And if I was to give an example around that,
there would be some hearsay that would shock you.
You know, there's some people that have co that have come up
with this notion there that it's easy to kind
of really treat Pacific Island
and Maori children without anesthetics.
Hey, how does that work for everybody?
Hope it's not your children.
Uh, we are really hopeful that te TU water would,
would be a step forward for Maori health,
and instead, these structures are being dismantled
piece by piece.
All I can say is removing the health principles does not
give guarantees to Maori
or anybody, uh, especially to Maori, a standing point
to access appropriate health services.
The same systemic issues will return
and that will come at a cost for the AU
and the services.
That's the end. Got it.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
The, the timer time has gone, gone off, so we do need
to move on, but I do just want to thank you, Diana, Megan,
Janet, and Ellen for your contribution, uh,
to the select committee process.
So thank thank you very, very much.
Uh, we will now move, um, back on the agenda to John.
Um, Gregson.
Uh, John, if you could accept the prompt
to become a panelist, um, we, you'll be promoted, uh,
and we can start, start your,
uh, presentation.
John, welcome to the subcommittee of the Health Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing, uh, this session.
Uh, we have allocated five minutes
for your oral, oral presentation.
We do have the written submission that you have made.
Um, so without too much to do, I'll hand it over to you,
Warhol,
let's just keep close together, not far apart.
Thank you for the opportunity to meet
with you called John Gregson talking more.
I'm a child and adolescent psychiatrist,
and I work for Water in Two Child
and Adolescent Mental Health Services.
I also have a role with the College of Psychiatrists,
and I support the R-E-N-Z-C-P submission,
but these views are my own.
I'm focusing on the main element of my written submission
in the 2022 to 23 financial year.
The latest we have statistics four.
The rate of suspected self-inflicted deaths for Maori
was 16.3 per hundred thousand population.
This compares to a rate of 9.0 for non-Maori
al almost double just one awful statistic.
Of course, I'm sure I don't need to remind this committee
that it's one of many, almost all health outcomes are worse
for Maori and this demands action.
For years, we have been moving slowly
in the right direction.
We have recognized the need to have health services
that offer people what they want.
And with Tang are involved in the decision making,
we are much more likely to get it right for Maori.
And we have realized that we get it right for Maori.
We usually get it right for everybody else.
We have recognized that unconscious bias means
that even well-meaning Paha will get it wrong.
We know that if Maori are not involved in creating a
solution, that solution will feel imposed.
So to repeat myself, we need health services that give TGA
what they need and that they see themselves reflected in
To achieve this Maori need to say what will work for Maori.
We have been moving forwards.
We have had more Maori decision making leading
to more quality services
that more Maori feel comfortable using.
Yes, it's been slow.
No, it's not been good enough,
but we have been moving forward.
It has been getting better.
We were on a journey
and we could be proud of our intention to keep traveling.
I'd like to say to the committee, don't slow us down,
but it's too late for that.
Please don't flow New Zealand into reverse.
Let's not lose the harder miles we have traveled.
This government has already abolished to Akafia
before we had the chance to see what it could achieve
to erode Murray involvement in health governance
further would be shameful.
I ask committee members to take a red pen
to this deeply flawed bell
and then listen to what your treaty treaty partner says
health futures should look like.
Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you, John. Thank you for that submission.
Uh, Ingrid I see has a hand up, so I'll hand over to Ingrid.
Thank you. Just a quick question.
Um, given that the bill doesn't seem logical
or rational to you on the evidence base,
can you proffer an opinion as to
what you think is going on here?
Um, I, I guess it seems like the,
the bill is driven by
what seems like an, an, an old fashioned philosophy of,
of we know best
and, um, of, um,
often male paha leaders knowing what's best for all of us.
I, I, that's very crude, but I guess that
and other actions by this government feel like that to me.
Okay. Well thank, thank you John, uh, for,
for your submission.
Uh, we will now, um, I don't see any other hands up
and we are pretty much right on time, so we'll now move on
to our next submitter, which is Jenny Campbell
Brio. Jenny, what?
Excellent. We're glad we've got you now.
Yeah, I'll turn around so I've not got the window behind.
Excellent. Well, welcome to the
subcommittee of the Health Select Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. Um, I am chairing this this session.
Um, we do have your written submission.
Um, we have allocated 10 minutes, uh,
for your oral submission.
Um, I'll hand that time over to you now.
Thank you, uh, members
of the select committee.
It may be small, but it is very precious. UA
Campbell, I'm submitting as covena
of Coal Action Miku CAM Group.
Along with personal perspectives,
we are all in this together.
Can members recommend
that the select committee abandon this bill
and that it is not passed into law?
Ori this is the most significant aspect of concern
for us in this bill.
The bill shows little consideration for
honoring and giving acknowledgement of te
ori TI principles.
Bring with them the essential need to fully consult
with Maori and the COPA around solutions
and understanding of our need
to work together on a consultative basis.
This is essential to preserve our health system,
which treats people as individuals
not using a one size fits all system,
which is the central focus of this amendment bill.
We need to respect each other as individuals,
treating people with respect
and dignity as everyone's health needs are unique
and people need to be listened to in order
to be treated according to their specific issues,
especially ethnicity and social empowerment.
Ability t's long-term wisdom from their lived
experience here as our first nation people must be values.
If it is not as en visited in this bill,
Tua will have their mana trampled on
through their COPA of working together.
As they support each other, they present
as in unique individuals in the healthcare system.
This is not acknowledged in this amendment bill.
We do not all start from the same place in HO or a space.
This is most clearly seen through the fact
that Maori average life expectancy is seven
to eight years less than non-Maori
as individualized system is the best way
to solve this inequity.
Not a one size fits
all inequity.
This amendment bill has taken equity aspects from the act.
This will affect how our public health provider
to fat aura delivers health services to Moori or wrong
or the New Zealand Health Charter has
been removed from this bill.
Would this removal is unjust.
This charter outlined how health workplaces are required
to be physically, mentally, and culturally safe.
This would have established that the system works with Piora
as its goal at every level of our public health system.
This goal would establish
that all communities which are affected by
unequal health outcomes.
We'll see PAA being fulfilled
for all disadvantaged groups such as Maori
and Pacifica Migrant Rainbow
and au, as well as people with disabilities.
We find this attitude
and proposed law as being racist and distressing.
Dis establishing Teka, the Maori Health Authority,
which was expected to achieve equal health outcomes,
outcomes, and monitor Maori health
has heightened this inequality,
Taking away Maori and Pacifica early bowel treat.
Cancer screening has further affected saving lives in those
cultural groups, which is devastating.
Now. This proposed bill continues with his inequality
and can member stress.
This is unjust.
We want to see more resources put into disenfranchised
and UA groups so that they have equity
with present advantage groups.
Iwi Maori partnership boards are weakened in health services
decisions decision making in this proposed bill.
This power bill gives more power to
Maori advisory committee, which is politically appointed.
This is another example of an injustice
for Maori in particular requiring cultural safety.
Tikanga and matangi knowledge on
TE's board has been removed in this bill.
Tua long-term wisdom
around health issues has been ex ignored in this situation,
which goes against principles outsourcing.
The changes which emphasize outsourcing care
to the private SEC sector are a terrible waste of money.
And DISRE is disrespectful of our public health system.
Our public system should be funded properly.
So staff are retained there with their expertise,
which would not require costly private sector involvement.
Obviously, the protests going on now show the terrible state
of our public health system.
Staff are leaving the public systems
because of their low wages for their superior skills.
Means a rundown system not fit for purpose.
Title changing the title
of the act from piora Healthy Families to Healthy Futures.
Piora will have an no impact on the content
of the amendment bill,
but will be a waste of time and money.
Another racist move given to re is an official language
of art or New Zealand
from, From a personal perspective, having had me many years
of personal experience with the Maori mental Health services
through having my daughter involved
for over about 40 years has made me aware of just
how these service are so critical for Tik Maori.
This same principle applies to all cultural groups
and people with different abilities who need special care.
Maori mental health services built up my daughter's
confidence in her ability
to get well all the while supporting me,
which I really appreciated.
We trusted their copa,
which helped her keep well once she was
able to leave hospital.
I noticed this work
for other unwell Maori people in their care as well.
I sincerely value these services
providing these safe spaces, specifically dying
for our designed for our community
is gaining equity in action.
And it was very important having this cultural experience
at those critical times.
One size does not fit all
KU members recommend
that the select committee abandon this bill
and that it is not passed into law Koto.
Excellent. Thank, thank you Jenny.
Um, I don't see any hands up from the select committee
members, but, uh, don't, don't take
that as a sign of anything.
We have received your written, written submission
and you have, you have outlined your position, uh, uh,
very, very clearly.
So thank you very much for taking the time, uh,
for both the written and oral oral submission.
So thank you. Thank you Again,
Thank you for listening to what I have for my memories
and how I've been involved in this particular system, Koto.
Excellent. Thank you. We will now move on to our next, um,
submitter, uh, TE or, um,
or, sorry, I'm getting this wrong.
Tikanga, uh, or, uh, iwi Maori partnership Board.
Oh, no, sorry. I've just been given, given a note
that we are going to just have a break for, for five,
five minutes, um, and we will be back.
Sorry about that.
Excellent. Right. It is now half past.
We will, we will continue.
Um, do we have the next submitter?
Uh,
excellent Mitchell, is it?
That's correct. Excellent.
Mitchell, welcome to the Health State Committee.
Um, I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing the
subcommittee for today.
Um, we do have your written submission, um,
and we have allocated, um, 10 minutes
for your oral, oral presentation.
Um, so I'll hand that 10 minutes over to you.
Um, if there's questions,
the end people will let, let you know.
Thank you for that.
So my name is Mitch and I'm the Deputy Chair of partnership.
Tara, firstly to the who have been laid on the,
and I also acknowledge the MA in her first coronation
that has brought the multitudes
of our Maori communities together under the auspices of
this is quite similar to the National National Hui
that was held here in New Plymouth last month
that brought together all 15 established I MPBs also under
the auspices of Tonga.
This was an opportunity for us to determine,
collect the positions in light of the impending amendments.
With that in mind, I want to state
that we stand in solidarity
with all Iwi Maori partnership boards throughout
and now Iwi Tara,
we have all strongly opposed the amendment.
Bill, IMPB is a voice
for over 27,000 Maori across our Tara,
whose stories, struggles
and aspirations have too often been overlooked in the
design of our health system.
Today I speak to the urgent need
for retaining the local Maori voice, A voice
that is apapa mandated, iwi appointed
and grand grounded in the lived realities of our people
to lead the transformation of Maori health in Tara.
Lemme begin with the facts.
These are not abstract statistics.
These are lived experiences of cancer.
Screening rates for Maori
and Taranaki are significantly lower than
for non Maori breast cancer.
In particular, 55% of Maori versus 71, 70 1% of one Maori
bowel cancer, 46.9%
of Maori versus 61.5% of non Maori.
And even cervical cancer
where we see 62.9% Maori versus
78.7% non Maori.
In terms of primary healthcare enrollment,
that is also alarmingly low.
When we look at taranaki statistics, only 19.5%
of Maori are enrolled in primary care compared to 71.2%
of Europeans immunization rates
for tamari Maori at 24 months have dropped to 61.9%,
and also as well known statistic.
And as many submitters have also said, life expectancy
for Maori and Taranaki is six
and a half years shorter for women,
and 4.8 years shorter for men.
So for us, these are not just numbers,
these are our mothers, our fathers, our tam.
These are avoidable deaths.
These are preventable inequities across Hui Wang
and community engagement.
Whanau have told us what they need
and the things that have come out quite consistently
through our discussions is culturally safe care delivered
by Maori for Maori mobile clinics
and popup vaccination units in Tara Maori midwives,
mental health practitioners
and oral health providers, even integrated services
that reflect the realities of whanau life use of Maori
and MA Maori and health delivery,
and also community based with transport support.
They've also told us what doesn't work
and three key things have come out from that discussion.
Disconnected systems, deficit based models,
decisions made far from the communities they affect
under the ACT 2022 is required to engage
with Maori support.
IBS provide timely data uphold te, yet
our monitoring shows that 71%
of these obligations are not met.
Health New Zealand has failed to provide timely data, failed
to engage meaningfully
and failed to protect Maori priorities
and service design and also investment.
This is just all performance
and it is also a breach of trust
and in our regard is also a breach of,
in addition, we also disappointed at the exclusion of
IBS in the drafting process of the amendment Bill, concerned
that we have voiced over many occasions,
IBS must be engaged within any future legislative
development or changes that impact Maori health
is not an advisory body.
We are waka mandated and iwi appointed.
We work within the sphere now.
Engagement must be direct unmediated
and grounded in local realities.
The proposed pay amendment bill seeks
to centralize decision making, reduce our role
to mere advisors, the proposes
that our engagement be filtered
through the Ho Maori Advisory Committee.
A move that we see dilutes our Tonga.
Any change that compromises is unacceptable to us.
A local voice matters because only our
people know our people.
We know and we understand the barriers in Taranaki
and in the rural areas.
We know the impact of prejudgment in clinical settings.
We know the importance of Copa Maori services.
We know how to design solutions that work.
Therefore, we're not here to ask, but we are here to assert.
We call for retention of ibs.
We call for direct engagement pathways
between I, PBS and the health system.
We call for ringfence investment in Copa Maori services.
We call for transparent data sharing
and Maori LED monitoring.
We call for representative Maori workforce across
all health domains.
And we call for co-design of services
that reflect whanau voice and local realities.
We have developed a community health plan,
a whole water Maori priorities report
and a monitoring framework.
We are ready, we are capable, we are committed
to the health select committee, to to water, to the crown.
We say honor the treaty, reject the amendment bill,
strengthen the roles of iwi Maori partnership boards across,
invest in Maori LED solutions.
Listen to local voice
because Maori is still dying younger than non Maori
because the system is still failing our people
because local voice is the lifeline of Maori health.
Finally, it's not lost on us
that we have an important section
of our health system on strike
and we acknowledge their valid cause of staff.
Safe staffing levels, pay equity, and appropriate pay rise.
Excellent, thank you. I see, um, Aisha has got a hand up.
Yeah, thanks very much for a really eloquent, uh,
submission Mitchell.
But, um, can you talk about, uh,
co-design of, uh, services
and how they've, um, achieved health outcomes in, in roi?
Well, we we're saying that we think
that further co-design is required.
Uh, we don't believe that
how services are fully meeting the needs.
And the only way that we think that they can is
through a co-designed approach
where we are sitting at the table, we are there
with decision makers and we are part
of the decision making process.
Yeah. Under Understood.
So you haven't had any experience of co-designing services
with the health system as it is?
Yeah, I mean, we, we can.
Um, I I always reflect on the response to COVID-19,
and that was a really good opportunity
to demonstrate the strength of co-design in
that process itself.
And what we saw was a resurgence from the ground,
from the grassroots of our people who were really wanting
to see better outcomes, um, better vaccination rates,
which then drove a real co-design process, not only with us
and our local, just our local health board,
but also with the likes of c DM and our local councils.
So that, that was a real success
and driven from, driven from the ground
and driven by our eeb.
Thank you. Excellent. Thank, thank you Mitchell.
And thank you for taking the time to come
to Health Select committee today, to present,
to present your submission.
Um, and I appreciate the time has
that has been put into your written submission as well.
So thank you. Thank you very much.
We now will move to our next, uh, submitter.
I do believe we've got Josh, Josh online.
Josh, uh, we have your written submission, um,
and we have allocated 10 minutes, uh,
for your oral presentation.
Um, I'll hand that time to you now.
Uh, we can't quite hear you, Josh.
Uh, we, we can't hear you. Josh,
How about now? Can you hear me
okay? Yes.
That that is better. Excellent.
We'll, we'll start, we'll start again. Welcome, Josh.
Let me just see. Can you hear me all right? Yes. Okay.
I can just barely hear you.
I had everything set up prior to when I was an attendee,
and then now that I've switched over
to panelists, everything's changed.
Um, but I'll, I'll be quick with my, I'll be quick
with my submission ua.
Uh, my name's Josh Fara. I am aside from this presentation.
I'm the Deputy Mayor of Gisborne.
I'm a long term serving counselor. I'm the top polling.
I've been the top polling in the general ward
for the last two elections for the majority of my elections
of the top polling candidate.
I present to you now, though, in my capacity as the chair
of TU IMPB of my appointment
to this board was endorsed by tu,
our regional Iwi collective entity.
My appointment as chair was endorsed
by our collective iwi via the iwi appointees to our board.
All of that to say I bring regional mana to the submission.
Uh, I want to acknowledge our former co-chair, Tanya Ronna,
on her service to our board in the preparation
of the submission.
Um, I'll take the report as read
and I'll, I will firstly say we support all
of the other IMPB
and their submissions regionalized to our individual, our
hapu based collective man.
So I, I won't re-litigate our entire submission.
The key points I actually want to touch on is number one,
workforce and number two IMPB accountability.
So the removal of the health charter, the removal
of the health charter affects the
obligations to, to our workforce.
These changes in this legislation will
disproportionately harm.
This removes the crown's formal commitment
to ensure our workforce is reflective of
and accountable to our communities.
Why workforce is important to me is
because you see me sitting here with a vis on,
I'm actually at one of the small businesses that I own,
which is a garage here in Gisborne.
So health needs that are regionalized to
actually affect my own productivity.
Two thirds of my staff are Maori.
Yes, which two thirds are
currently affected by health needs.
So the, the health charter would have direct link
into my own business productivity,
let alone the regional health service productivity.
If, if we can get that regional health service into,
uh, informed by and, and,
and their, their workforce, there is informed by teti
that will have a knock on effect.
Their productivity will have a knock on effect to businesses
like mine that I own.
We have a large population of Maori here.
So that, that's my first in regards to, to workshop, uh,
my workshop productivity and to workforce.
Sorry. Uh, the second point that I wanted
to make was specifically in regards to sections 29
and 31 29, 2 31.
It's the IMPB accountability.
Uh, in sections 29 to 31, it says
that we'll be accountable to HA.
We don't want that in for the fundamental reason
that IMPB should, we are appointed by our iwi,
so we should be accountable to our iwi.
As I outlined at the start, my own position on TU
is via our regional iwi collective entity.
My own appointment as chair endorsed by our collective iwi,
that that Avaya the iwi appointees on my board.
IMPB should be accountable to our iwi.
We should have a relationship with HA,
but we are appointed by our iwi and accountable to our iwi.
We are tied 52 2.
It is our iwi that lead us and, and not anyone else.
So those are the two main points
that I wanted to make there, uh, Mr.
Chair, and I'll leave some space here
for any questions in regards to what I've just said.
I do need to caveat this though, that the sounds really,
really quiet on your end.
So I may not hear your question.
Yeah. So well thank, thank you for that, Josh.
Your sound is actually very clear. We can hear you clearly.
So, uh, I see Aisha's got a hand up, Aisha,
um, over to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks Josh for your submission.
Uh, I spent yesterday in, uh, Gisborne with TGA Health
and with, uh, Nati, pero Health, as well as other providers
as an IMPB chair.
Um, can you help us understand what this bill does?
Uh, how does it, in, how much influence
can you have now over how services are decided
or if, if the act was working, uh, properly versus returning
to just being a contractor with the government
for services service provision?
Yeah. Yeah. I, I guess the biggest impact
for us was the trajectory that we were on in order
to be able to have, uh, assurance
and satisfaction about real Toyota
Tutu Health service delivery.
You know, there's the majority of our,
of our whanau here on the coast, uh, uh, Maori.
We had this, uh, clear tra uh, like I said, trajectory
around, uh, co-design,
but also design like URA Health, uh,
would've alluded to, like Nazi woulda would've alluded to
actually, like a lot of the practices, Maori
and non Maori would've alluded to around here.
Let, let's, let's get this straight.
The, we want the best health service for all of our people.
Like, again, like the previous submitter,
like we demonstrated over co uh, over, um, lockdown
during COVID-19, you know, our, our Maori health providers,
we're providing whole water for everyone.
What's good for Maori is good
for everyone here on the coast.
So it's, it ha it will affect our trajectory moving forward.
It'll also affect, like I said, the,
the regional productivity,
because if the health service productivity is affected,
it affects everyone here.
It affects our school attendances,
it affects workshops like mine.
It, it affects small, small businesses like mine as well.
So, I, I hope I've answered your question there. Um, doctor,
Excellent. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Josh, for your submission.
Um, and congratulations on your polling.
Um, you are obviously, obviously working hard, so thank,
thank you very much for the time you've taken
to come thank you, uh, in front
of the Health Select committee
today. So thank you very much.
Thank you very much, Dr. Cameron.
Excellent. We now will, um, move to, um,
the McGinnis, uh, institute.
I do believe we have, uh, Wendy on online.
Well, welcome Wendy. Um, you are no stranger
to this, this process.
Um, I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing the subcommittee
of the Health Select Committee.
Uh, we do have your written submission, the higher 57 pages,
uh, worth of, of information, uh, as always,
always well thought out.
So, uh, we have allocated 10 minutes
for your oral submission.
Um, I'll pass that over to you now.
Thank you. Um, look, thanks very much.
Um, this is actually a really important submission
and to give you some idea how important it is.
Um, I'm actually in London at sort
of three 30 in the morning, so if I make a mistake,
please bear with me.
Um, now I'm hoping I can share the document, uh, with you.
Um, be one moment.
Sorry, it's just looked out
like, of course it would have to.
Um, we go.
So, um, I really recognize,
oh, just, sorry.
The, the people that have, um, spoken, um, amazing, um,
observations and things around.
Sorry, it's not quite working.
Can you see that?
Yes, yes, we can. We can see, um, a Word document, um,
Okay, fantastic.
And that's just so that I can go through things.
Um, look, so basically really recognize, um, the number
of people that submitted and the different comments
and people that have actually really shared their stories.
Um, terribly important
because of course we will, we come from a research aspect,
but this is, um, really about people as well.
And, um, what hopefully we can contribute in a way to areas
that, um, where people have raised issues.
Um, the first thing I really wanted to raise, um,
was the dashboard idea.
I think one of the things is an incredible lack of, um,
regular data, um, that is trusted.
Uh, so we've actually put forward this idea that, um,
and it could actually be in legislation
that a dashboard has produced.
Uh, and I think that that would be really helpful
for finding out what the temperature
of the healthcare system is.
Um, definitely, um, there's issues
around the world at the moment.
This is, this is not a New Zealand issue,
but what we wanna do is actually get the intelligence so
that we can make decisions
and benchmark results in a, in a more sort of, um,
you know, general area.
So that's one of the things that we think would be a great,
um, addition to the legislation.
Um, we had a couple of areas that we haven't been raised
yet, um, that we wanted to raise
that are actually in our submission.
Uh, one is AI and, um, we call them robots.
And we sort of proposed that there should be an AI
and robotic, um, strategy created
for the healthcare system.
And we actually refer to Singapore
as being a really good example of that.
Um, and I think that, uh, in terms of the strategies
that you've documented in the bill for me, um, all
but one of them was actually done in 2023.
And what the proposal's actually doing is pushing
for those pieces of, uh, those strategy components
to be redone in the next 24 months.
Um, we suggest that's far too early, um, and far too many.
And there's actually more important areas that need
to be developed as strategy.
And we'd really like the committee to think about both the
AI and robotic, um, strategy
and also the, um, uh, which we haven't mentioned,
I don't think, which was the antibiotic,
um, resilience strategy.
You know, how are we going to cope in those sort of areas.
So we sort of find, if I was being so blunt, is
that the proposal, um, as it stands is, is very sort
of backward looking, and yet we are dealing with a very, um,
significant change.
I mean, in my sort of career, I've never seen
so many different critical, if you like, ripple effects
or waves sort of all hitting each other at the same time.
We, you know, we've got the geopolitical, we've got the ai,
we've got the aging, um, population.
Um, it's almost like,
and you know, it's a perfect storm of issues
that is hitting the healthcare system
and the people operating in the healthcare system
who are actually the people that we go
to when we absolutely need help.
So the pandemic, um,
which we will have probably appreciated.
We've done a lot of work in the pandemic space,
and we still are, and there's still significant gaps.
Uh, we have concerns that the inquiry, unfortunately,
with its two phases actually means it almost needs a third
phase because it needs to all be brought together
and it's very sort of silo based.
And also, we don't actually know,
although we are going to do an OIA to understand how many
of the report, uh, for the phase one,
which was the most extensive
and, um, took over the most,
the biggest timeframe, many ways.
Phase two was more narrow and more specific,
but there's not going to be this overall perspective
that I think is really important.
So we sort of have some concerns around that.
The fact that there's only an interim, um, pandemic plan
that that is not in the proposal.
So, for example, the section which you've got, um,
which I've actually got here,
which I think might be easiest, ah, um,
and the proposal here, which you can see in front of you,
should actually include the pandemic strategy.
Um, we, you know, we actually need
to embed it in the central part
of the, um, healthcare system.
And at the moment it's sitting off in a little, a area of,
and the issue around that is the fact that, um,
the argument is that the, uh, ministry of Health are arguing
that, well, because they're waiting for report two,
but actually report two actually isn't
where the action is in terms of the healthcare system.
It's actually in that first, uh, phase.
And I don't think there's been enough, um, uh,
a response by government in terms of the first report.
So I think that there's some real issues,
opportunities that are being missed.
And if we did get hit with another pandemic, which is,
you know, possible, um, we are completely, um,
we are just not prepared and we
haven't picked up those lessons.
So I, I wanted to emphasize that
because not only have we had the shadow of COVID,
we actually have the potential risk
of another pandemic hitting this already, um, stressed,
um, re um, area that lacks resource.
And I know the country's not rich at the moment.
Um, but therefore we have to be very smart
and we have to make sure we don't overstress the officials
with lots of strategies that are not needed.
Um, and we actually need
to think very clearly about the strategies that are needed
that are actually gonna get us.
So it's all about really high level focus
that is actually required in this space.
Um, and obviously a lot of the other issues
that have been raised, the equity
and so forth, we still think, um, that's
what the healthcare system's there to do.
So I think the removal is not needed, um,
and actually probably once again, weakens the system
that needs support.
Um, but it really open to questions, um, the, the, um,
it, it, it is sort of, um, I understand where we've ended up
where we are, but actually it's time
to be terribly ambitious and very smart.
Excellent. Thank, thank, thank you, Wendy.
And I do notice you are sharing your screen saying th uh,
3:56 AM so I appreciate the,
appreciate the dedication.
Um, ASHA's got a hand up.
Thank you. Always love a call
to be very ambitious and very smart.
Um, thank you for your very thoughtful submission.
Uh, I've reading it, the, uh, there's a lot
of material in the appendices about, about strategies, uh,
which are a core part of the PIORA legislation.
Can you please give us your view on
what constitutes a good use of strategy for the purpose
of governing the health system or,
or perhaps where strategies are ineffective?
It a really good question.
So when we first started our GDS index, we thought
that we could actually make a judgment call on whether a
strategy was appropriate or not,
and whether it was working, um, was it meeting its purpose,
was it transparent?
Did it contain measures?
And what we found is that we couldn't do that work
because the strategy documents themselves had a lot of
that important material missing.
So instead, we re geared our GDS index
to being about transparency
of these critical issues about purpose measures success,
um, alignment within the wider system.
So we created a scorecard to do that,
and that's the scoring
that you see at the end of the document.
So an answer to your
question if we want.
So, and, and the di sorry,
and the difference between planning
and strategy is so important.
So when things are constant, you can rely on plans
because it's linear, everything's static.
So a plan five
or 10 years ago can actually be a plan that is useful today,
but with the level of uncertainty that we are seeing,
actually, strategy becomes more important.
And even more important than strategy is sort
of your moral compass, which is that high level, um, sort
of policy statement.
Um, one of the things that we've argued is that,
that the whole system fails
because there is too many different documents,
and the linear relationship between those
is relatively ad hoc.
So there's no hierarchy.
Once you get into any, any
of the strategies down the bottom, there's no hierarchy.
Um, the, um,
policy statement doesn't actually include the word
priorities in its title.
So, so people sort of fail to understand the, the layers
and the alignment that's required in a system for it
to be efficient and effective.
So you've, we've kind of got a problem that the whole system
needs to be mapped in such a way so that, um,
you can see the purpose, you see the moral compass,
and you see how it ripples through each of the strategies.
So, um, I dunno if that sort of makes sense,
but you're looking for transparency in each strategy
document, and you're looking for alignment
and you're looking for cost effectiveness
and goals, all those things that I know, you know,
but actually it wouldn't be that hard to do.
But the problem is the proposed bill actually just
amplifies the old, and it doesn't create the new,
and it's a real opportunity to create some sort of, um,
I would say integrated
and aligned healthcare system that at least enables people
to know what's working and what's not. Yes.
Thank, thank you, Wendy. We will need, need
to le le leave it there, but thank, thank you very much
and for your persistence to get up in the middle
of the night to present to the committee,
We really do appreciate
terribly important what you're doing.
So keep it up and good luck. Thank you.
Thank, thank you very much.
So we now will move to the next submitter,
which is Team Moana, a Iwi Maori partnership board.
Once again, we have allocated 10 minutes
for this submission.
Um, uh,
and we also have the written,
written material in, in front of us.
Um, so I do believe there might be a couple of submitters.
Is there? Yes, yes. Yep. Perfect. And we've got both.
So I'll hand the 10 minutes over to you now,
Uh, uh,
partnership board
greeting, uh, Dr.
Hoish Campbell and to the committee.
Uh, my name is, uh, um, re I am one of the co-chairs of
Maori partnership board.
And on the screen, joining me is the wonderful,
my Madam Co-chair, um, Winton look, I like to start us off,
if I may, and I also,
the same will take our report as being read.
So we are the representing,
uh, uh, 16 iwi I might add along, uh, across the bay,
plenty coastline and points inland.
We are here to stay clearly state clearly
that we oppose the proposal
to reduce Iwi Maori partnership boards, IBBs
to advisory roles, uh, purely and simple
and in plain language.
Um, um, uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Dr.
Hamish, I'd now like to hand over to my, uh,
wonderful colleague, a co colleague
and co-chair of Madam Ru Winton
to take over from here, Kilda
K
uh, called the co person of.
So as we present to the panel today, uh,
firstly, why do we oppose this bill?
Well, firstly, advisory boards can be ignored.
Partnerships under the three tier means shared
decision making, not token consultation.
So we see,
or as a partnership relationship,
which means shared decision, not making,
not being sided into non-binding advice.
Secondly, equity at risk.
We believe that
if we continue down the pathway that is the intent
of this bill, we will not only
undermine our treaty relationship,
we Maori in itself will be excluded from key
decisions that put equity at risk,
therefore, widening health, any
for Maori, because we have found in our experience,
centralized planning often misses local needs.
And with that strong iwi partnership board input
to fit order
are least accountable for Maori health outcomes.
In we have, as my colleague,
the colleague had said, we, we have over 16 iwi
with pockets of rural isolation.
So Maori health status within this
reflects deep inequities.
Maori die on an average
of seven years earlier than non Maori Maori TAM
had the lowest immunization coverage in the country.
And Maori are twice likely
to face barriers in gp.
These inequities are not accidental.
They're the result of a system where Maori voices
have too often been sidelined.
We can then iwi Maori partnerships
would repeat those mistakes
and guarantee poorer outcomes for Maori
and for as a whole.
Thirdly, most iwi in
are post settlement entities with proven
governance experience.
A clear example of our work with
was in managing the closure of the obstetrics ward between
and OLA hospitals.
Our leadership
and input with engaging our communities throughout
the coastline enabled communities to know
what was happening, particularly for Maori living in rural
isolated areas where they were waiting in the car park.
Because traveling back to their homes, which is three
to four hours away from any decent hospital,
was unacceptable.
These are the key local nuances
that we know about our local communities.
And because we worked in partnership with
we were many, we managed to navigate
and keep our communities fully informed.
Despite the fact of the pressure workforce pressure on
hospital, we work together
to manage this issue impacting on our hospitals.
Thirdly, well, fourthly, at the end of this,
we are saying it takes genuine partnership
to deliver practical, accountable solutions
that protect wana
and our communities to maintain service quality.
By reducing our role
to advisor whenever we see fit
is an undermining of our commitment to all
of our communities.
And we stand firmly upon the fact that we deserve
as communities to always be heard
and demand accountability from the system moving forward.
Our recommendations are we retain
and strengthen shared
decision making powers with every partnership board.
Also, we need to legislate formal partnerships with
if it's going be there, uh,
Maori advisor.
If we don't have any formal relation ship in place,
then they aren't bound to anything.
They can just come on, add process
and decide they'll pop in
whenever that well, that is clearly unacceptable.
So for us, we must ensure that there are proper
relationships or more relationships in place
that will keep those agencies
and the system accountable back to our community.
And the decisions are actually
at the local level.
So we, lastly, we support as to
EWI led models of health
because we can measure the gains
made when you follow
those models of healthcare.
Like, like who are tum,
we have frameworks,
are frameworks that we can follow
and share, show clear outcome as
a highlighted by the minister.
Well, that's me. I handed back to my colleague nie.
To close up and summarize,
Thank Madam Chair, Dr.
Hamish, um, uh, the Health Select committee.
Uh, absolutely acknowledge, uh, your time spent listening
to, uh, uh, very, very passionate, uh, um, presentation.
I love her to pieces. She's
exactly, uh, where we need to be.
So like in summary, reducing IBS advisory status for us, uh,
to monitor IPB is a backward step.
Uh, it undermines the TTT weakens accountability
and threatens Maori health equity, uh, to monitor
to our proven governance partners.
Most of us suppose settlement entities, as was mentioned by,
uh, my Madam Chair colleague with strong capability
and strong governance, um, skills,
our leadership in managing the obstetric ward closure shows
that, um, uh, partnership can achieve to strip us back
to advisory status, waste the capability
and undermines partnership.
Um, Mr.
Mr Chair, uh,
and the health committee sort of committee
to monitor calls on the crown
to engage a general partnership
with Iwi Iwi Maori not diminish our role,
but to ensure Maori voices actively shape the health system
leading to improve outcomes for whanau in communities.
We are put here by our iwi, we're mandated by our iwi,
we're answerable to our iwi
and the communities on the ground
to whanau voices. Thank you, sir.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much.
We've just gone over 10 minutes, so, uh, we will,
we will need to keep moving.
But I do just want to thank you both for taking the time
to come and present to the select committee.
Uh, and I appreciate the passion and the enthusiasm, uh,
and, and, and the submission.
Uh, so thank you very much
and thank you for the time taken
for your written submission as well.
We will now move to our next submitter.
Um, I do believe we've got Tamara online.
Uh, Tamara, you actually have two submissions.
One is an individual and one is, um, I, uh, I, uh,
Mia, uh, trust.
Um, what I will suggest we do is we'll give you the 10
minutes for the trust, and then immediately
after we'll move to your personal
submission for five minutes.
Um, that will give you a total of 15 minutes.
Um, if you want to change the way you split
that time, that is up to you.
I,
uh, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, and I take my witness as read.
I want to begin by acknowledging TE as a foundation
for any meaningful health reform in ua.
Anything less renders te
as a calculated mechanism of deception.
HEI stands firmly opposed to the Health Futures
AOR amendment bill in its current form.
NA MA is a collective voice of Maori
and maternity committed to promoting
and protecting traditional Maori birth
and parenting practice practices.
Much like the, in 2022, NA MA was formed
to counter the impact of Western maternity, uh,
and health systems that evolved into state funded,
uh, parenting services.
That became tools of assimilation.
The system disrupted Maori ways of life
and continue to impact Maori health outcomes today.
And in the words of Dr.
Papa, uh, if you are not suffering from oppression,
you are probably benefiting it from it.
The way our to contend with the realities of that,
the history of maternal
and infant care in UA is troubling Laws policies were not
kind nor benevolent.
They were deliberately designed
to enforce the racist beliefs of their authors.
Government funded health agencies promoted the idea
of strengthening racial stock through white breeding.
Just reflect on that for a moment.
The harsh eugenic mindset behind public health initiatives,
uh, feel familiar today.
One key figure, uh,
and the founder of Plunket made exaggerated claims about the
benefits of hospitals and of healthcare.
He promoted his fanatical vision of
incarcerating the defective.
And of course, this included Maori.
He planned to prevent their reproduction endorsing eugenics.
The word or the name of Lady Plunket wife
of Governor General of the day, uh, would be linked towards
that name and status linked towards legitimizing this
movement politically and publicly.
Dr. King was a lo a political lobbyist pushing firmly his
ideas into government circles.
This mix of health policy, politics,
and racial ideology feel very, very familiar.
Understanding this history is essential.
It shows our health systems can be shaped
by harmful ideology and why IPVs cultural safety
and equity must not be amended.
Uh, as these were attempts to correct, uh, the harmful
behaviors of the past and now present, this bill claims
to improve health service effectiveness.
But beneath that claim lies, uh,
a troubling retreat away from equity focus.
Foundations of the original Pay Pay Act
weakens Maori governance,
reduces iwi Maori partnership participation in the
governance level, and reduces them to advisory roles,
as we have heard from the many submitters over the last few
days, with little real power as an attempt to sideline
Hanau voice in their own healthcare.
This is not a technical adjustment,
it is a retreat backwards to the days
of old health disparities faced by Maori are stark
and ongoing maternal suicide rates remain alarmingly.
High Maori women within the 80% of that tragedy
demands urgent attention, yet past over two decades now,
nothing has been done about that infant mortality.
Things like sur, which are preventable
infant deaths disproportionately affect Maori
and Pacific pupils within the 70 to 80%.
And now we have seen this past decade congenital syphilis
contributing to the increasing rise in stillbirth.
These among many other horrendous statistics laid bare the
failure of this health system whose outcomes are third world
for Maori Maori are paying with their lives.
The bill removes, uh,
crucial safeguards like cultural safety
and external accountability as protections that stand
between Maori and these ongoing treaty breaches.
It's not lost on us that these hospitals were built on land
stolen from, from Maori,
and that the proposed infrastructure committee will likely
absorb the equity of these assets they acquired, um,
that will produce significant amount of pollution, uh,
at its unsustainable level for the impact of that, that,
and of course, our wellbeing.
Our call is clear.
All evidence points to poverty, housing,
nutrition, systemic racism.
Uh, effective Maori, uh, health services
could be attained if government departments
and ministries engaged in a coordinated cross agency, uh,
collaboration on these issues.
However, uh, none of
that work will get done if Maori are not at the table,
because it is likely to affect us the most.
Now, may I urge the select committee to reject the bill
and any amendments that we can and equity mandate
or Maori governance instead, champion a future.
We equity, uh, of outcomes are central
with all of our mahi.
Um, I have a second submission on behalf of my T
and my,
I'm a midwife and a mother and a grandmother,
and we live the realities of the, the things
that this bill claims to address.
Within my immediate au we have face leukemia, uh,
which took my mother lupus that affects my brother epilepsy,
and a tumor that affects my son.
And a heart condition
of another child is undergone four open heart surgeries in
his first four years of life.
My Ana's health journey is marked by deep loss
and, uh, preventable injury.
He, we don't make it to 65 in short.
And on my mother's side, I'm 30th generation from the
My Father's side, fourth generation.
This bill, though it claims to improve health, uh,
is another step of course, backwards.
And it sidelines our voice, especially in governance
and leadership, remove us,
removes us from a direct influence over our own health
services and strips away our ibs.
Real power reduces our leadership roles to advisory
and centralizes not only Western models,
but western language.
This is not partnership
and is taking us back when our voices were ignored
and our needs were un met.
I want to remind, um, select committee today of a quote
that I read from a chairman of a health board.
Maori do not own land.
They do not pay rates,
therefore, they do not deserve healthcare.
This is a shameful statement
and is a part of New Zealand's proud health history.
The legacy of racism and neglect persist today
and is embedded in the system of inequity.
And no amount of infrastructure can fix
what we cannot reach.
Health inequalities for Maori are real and deadly.
Our face, higher rates of illnesses, poorer outcomes,
especially in the first 2000 days of life,
which is a critical window at the start of our Tam
days beside them.
Uh, here I said I was a Maori, but I said I was a midwife
and I'm also a unicorn.
I had to provide my whanau with, uh,
maternity care remotely.
My own Una could not secure a midwife in the
area that she lives in.
And therefore, if I struggle to find a midwife,
what hope do our whanau have?
My wau story shows what matters to us, um,
preventable injury, uh, and harm, uh,
and the health system that does not listen to Maori
and does not plan for the upcoming need.
This bill doesn't protect us.
It weakens the very tools
of accountability that keep us safe.
Um, there can't see any investment
that prioritizes w centered preventative primary services
that address the social determinants impacting,
uh, our future.
Of course, we need to grow
and retain the Maori health workforce, um,
because people who will not exploit the system at the cost
of our wau are vital.
Uh, we do have primary healthcare
that is privately operated, publicly funded, uh,
and major gaps in between.
So I urge the Select committee for a second time
to reject the bill, uh, in its current form,
and uphold an equity mandate
that strengthens smiley governance, cultural safety, and,
and all its facets.
Excellent. Thank, thank you. Thank you very much for both
of those, uh, submissions.
Um, do we have any questions now?
We don't seem to have any hands popping up,
but I do just want to thank you for coming in front
of the Health Select Committee, um,
and also sharing your Ana's, uh,
health journey, uh, with us.
Um, it is very, a very powerful story.
So thank, thank you very much.
Um, and thank you for both, both of your submissions.
Um, we now will move to our next submitter,
which I do believe is Pauline Hill.
Uh, Pauline, can you just accept, uh, the invitation
to be a panelist, um, that will promote you
so we can, we can see and and hear you.
Yes, I have done that. Brilliant. Excellent.
There you go. Well, welcome Pauline.
Um, you've probably, I dunno if you've been online, uh,
for a while, but you've probably seen how,
how this procedure operates.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing the
Subcommittee of Health State Committee.
We have a number of members online.
We also have our officials online.
We do have your written submission, um,
and we have allocated 10 minutes for your oral presentation.
Um, so I'll hand that time to you now,
Um,
trust.
Um, and just a couple of words about who are we,
we are located at the southern end of tga.
That is, which is the center of our world.
We are a small but very proud iwi, um,
like everybody else, I'm, I'm sorry,
I've got, I've got a bug.
Um, like everybody else,
I'm gonna take our submission as read.
I'm only going to speak to a couple of points, um,
because I don't see the need to walk through everything.
Um, but like all of the speakers I've just heard clearly,
we oppose the proposed amendments to the, um,
PIORA Act in its current form.
Um, having said that,
although I've selected two items I'm going to highlight,
we actually consider all of our submission points to be
of equal concern and importance.
So I'm sharing them in the context of they're all important.
Um, in the entrance of time, I'll highlight these ones
and then I'll answer any questions if you have any.
Um, I'm going to focus on our, um,
I'm actually going to focus on our
treaty settlement with the Crown.
That's the first issue I wanna focus on.
It's covered in our, in our submission.
Um, but I do want to talk about the fact that as
a past Tam negotiator that was working with the Crown, um,
for seven years, I can say that
we spent a very long time, um,
in developing the Crown apology.
And that's where I wanna start.
Um, because that crowned apology,
what happened was the minister of the time came to our, um,
our, and talked about all the breaches that we had,
um, had happened against us.
Um, I can tell you that we had our farmer neighbors
and a whole lot of other people
who were weeping at that time hearing that.
And here we are again, talking about
what we perceive to be breaches.
Um, so if you look at
the content in, in our submission
and the Crown's apology, we, we did talk about the need
for the Crown to restore its honor
and reputations as a treaty partner
and aone for its past failure to uphold the treaty
with apology and settlement.
Um, we also noted that the Crown had a forward looking hope
to building a new relationship
with Tam Hadi based on respect for the Treaty
of Wang and its principles.
That was in 2012, we settled,
and now we're looking back over those years
and saying to ourselves, we thought there was a lot
of gains in the last few years,
but we actually consider the proposed amendments
to this Pie Order Act.
Um, and all the other legislation that strips our rights
and interests under the treaty confirms
that the Crown is not honoring our treaty
settlement redress at all.
The Crown's proposed removal of the Treaty
of Wgi proposal from numerous pieces of legislation,
including this one we are focused on today,
is in direct conflict
with the Crown Apology in our settlement legislation.
The second issue I'm going to highlight,
and again, it is in our submission, um,
is we have set out the specific breaches that we see.
Um, and I'm not gonna look at that detail
because it all of you have seen it.
Um, I'd simply like to raise the issue that
settlement legislation does not freeze the law in place.
We know that we, we all know that.
Um, but we do anticipate that the Crown would recognize
as treaty partners, um, that both parties are
obligated to work in a way that
previous speakers have talked about, uh, in a world
of partnership that's consistent
with the settlement commitments.
Um, so specifically we have identified that the removal
of the statutory treaty based health protections contradicts
absolutely contradicts the Crown's apology
and the commitment to honor the treaty
principles and perpetuity.
Um, we think that's fairly clear.
Um, it undermines mechanisms that give effect to our deed
and the assurances of partnership and protection.
Um, it creates a PEs, uh, precedent, a seriously
concerning precedent for dismantling treaty clauses
and other legislation threatening our redress arrangements
in terms of conservation fisheries, RMA processes and more.
Um, and I'm, I'm actually going
to pull that to an almost to, to a close now
and open it up to see if you have any questions.
Um, finally what I would say is
that our recommendation set out
what we are looking for the committee to do.
We consider seriously
that these amendments are going in
entirely the wrong direction.
We consider that, um, these, uh,
proposed amendments are going to take the health sector led
back decades, decades and decades.
Um, so in a previous life, I was a registered midwife,
registered nurse, and I'm really clear of
what the sector health sector had to guide, um, our practice
and our outcomes at that time.
I have a serious concern that this legislation is going
to undermine Yep, decades of gains,
and as previous speakers have indicated,
that will directly impact on all of our whanau iwi.
Um, so that is my submission
or summary of my submission, um,
because I consider that what we've written, um,
covers the full story,
but I actually wanted more of a conversation.
Excellent. Well, thank, thank you, Pauline.
I I will just, uh, mention
that you have written a very good, uh, submission.
It is very well laid out,
and I inc appreciate the table with the, uh, the impact, uh,
mapping at the end, end of, of your, your submission.
Mm-hmm. Um, I don't see any immediate hands, uh, coming up.
Um, but I think that's probably, you have given such a clear
oral and written presentation, so thank you.
Thank, thank you very, very much.
Okay. Sorry. Thank you. The phone's just going.
That's okay.
Excellent. Oh, well, uh, we, we can let you go, go
and answer that yes, if you'd like.
So, tha thank, thank you very much, um, committee,
we will now be taking a break till, uh, 10 to four, uh,
when hopefully we will have some more submitters online.
Um, so if we can be back by 10 to four,
that'd be most appreciated,
right?
It is 10 to four. I'm just waiting
for other committee members to come online, uh,
before we start.
So just hang far for a minute.
Excellent. Brilliant. I can see, see them coming online now,
we are now going to move to the Council
of Medical Colleges in New Zealand.
Um, if you could just accept the prompt
to become a panelist, that'd be most appreciated.
Uh, once again, I'm Hamish Campbell.
I'm chairing the subcommittee
of the Health Select Committee.
Uh, we do have your written, written submission, um,
and we have allocated 10 minutes for your oral,
oral presentation.
Um, and Samantha, I see you there.
So I'll hand over Oh, and Alex as well.
So I'll hand over the time to you, uh, the 10 minutes, uh,
how you can use as you like.
Killer, thanks very much. Um, yeah.
I'm Samantha Mein and I'm chair
of the Council of Medical Colleges.
Um, the council is, uh, represents the voice
of 18 medical colleges in RO New Zealand.
Um, the medical colleges are not-for-profit bodies that, um,
cover training, examinations, recertification,
and standards for medical practitioners.
And our member colleges provide support
for over 9,000 specialists,
medical practitioners across the country.
The Council of Medical Colleges opposes this bill.
We considered an approach of re recommending amendments,
but, uh, as we would normally do,
but the bill on the whole is too, um,
regressive on imposing, improving health outcomes,
and particularly for Maori, and has left us with no choice
but to oppose it in its entirety.
And we wanna focus this submission on a couple of things
that are of particular focus for the colleges
and, um, areas of importance to us.
What the first one is the weakening
of the health systems commitment to equity for Maori.
The evidence of inequity in Maori
health outcomes is overwhelming.
As many of us know.
Uh, Maori experienced disproportionately higher rates
of morbidity and mortality,
and it's exacerbated by systemic barriers
to accessing healthcare.
Maori have shorter life expectancy.
Maori face higher rates of chronic disease,
including diabetes, et cetera.
They also experience these conditions at a younger age
compared to the rest of the population.
And disparities in access to specialist care persists, um,
further compounding inequities,
even though we've tried our best so far.
And we know from examples of equity focused screening,
that intentional focus on equity
for Maori lifts the outcomes to everybody.
The Bill waters down this focus, um,
for the New Zealand Health system to improve ma
how Maori health outcomes by reducing the role
of Iwi Maori partnership boards
and Health New Zealand's role in engaging
with local Maori communities.
Um, it removes the Health New Zealand's accountability
to local Maori communities.
It also, um, removes Health New Zealand's requirement
to develop the CAP capability
and capacity to respond to ma Maori health equity equities.
And it also removes Health New Zealand's requirement
to engage with Iwi Maori partnership boards, all
of which are critical to improving equity for Maori
and our Iwi Maori partnership boards ability to monitor
and the performance of
how the health system is addressing inequities and,
and their involvement in the development
of any strategies is also being removed.
And why does this matter? Well, there are structural levers
that recognize that inequitable equitable health outcomes
require Maori led, Maori designed
and Maori delivered solutions.
And this bill doesn't help that targeted design
that tackles the systemic barriers to healthcare, um,
work international and national evidence supports this
approach to addressing health inequities
and the approach reduces barriers across the rest
of the population as well.
So, um, even all of it across the board in relation
to equitable outcome for Maori, um, is a step backwards.
The other clause that we'd really like
to focus on is clause 11, which has been put into the,
um, act.
We want to, uh, speak to this
because we believe that there's been a lot
of confusion around this clause.
And that in itself speaks to the issue of the lack
of consultation in, um, drafting this bill.
It was a surprise to many of us,
and in particular to medical protection
that this clause had been, um, put into the bill.
Um, and we think the medical protection submiss, um,
society's submission is the most accurate reading
of the clause and the issues that it fa gives us.
They have access to lawyers,
which we didn't have in a timely manner.
And, um, we have had further conversations with them
and also with the Public Service Commission to just to see,
um, sound out what this clause actually means
and the intention of it.
And it's hard to decide what the intention is.
Health New Zealand as a Crown agent has already subject
to Subparts two and four of the Public Service Act
that the clause refers to.
And subpart two imposes responsibilities on boards
of Crown agencies and, uh, meaning the agency
and the executives.
And Subpart four provides for the ability
of the Public Service Commissioner to set minimum standards
of integrity and conduct.
Clause 11 A creates a purposeful
and misleading impression that public service employees,
that's, um, contractors, secondee,
anyone working in Health New Zealand,
share the same responsibilities under the Pub Public Service
Committee Act as executives of Health New Zealand, in a way
that it words the application of Subpart two
and four in the Health New Zealand's
workforce, which is not the case.
So, um, the Public Service Commission code directive
for the public service worker is that the relevance
of politically neutral sits on a continuum.
So it depends on where you are in the
position, uh, in your role.
And the principle comes more relevant,
the closer the person is to the minister
and the policy and law making.
So medical practitioners have professional obligations,
codes of ethics, good medical standards, um,
and the patient always comes first, as well
as sitting under the Bora that also factor in.
So the way the Clause 11 is worded,
and it makes pieces of sub two
and four, it applies 'em
to Health New Zealand workforce in a way that, um, removes
that critical context of the Public Service Act.
And, um, it reinforces an impression of an obligation not
to make any critical common comment about the government.
It also important to remember that responsible act advocacy
for patients should not be painted
as not being politically neutral.
So this is not the intent
of the code under the Public Service Act as well.
So the wording of this clause will lead
to a misinterpretation, it could be by managerial staff
and also a scy silencing effect on doctors
that may affect patient outcome.
The MP MPS position,
and our position is that the clause is
unnecessary and should be removed.
There's no legal reason to have this clause in the bill,
and it will recreate a chilling effect on
doctors' advocacy for their patients.
And this could have wider implications for patient safety.
So I'm happy to take any questions,
but we recommend to the committee
that they do not recommend this bill to the house.
Excellent. Thank you for that submission.
Um, Aisha, I think has got your hand up.
Uh, thanks very much Dr.
Merton, for a really clear, uh, summary of the elements of
that, um, application of public, uh, service considerations
to Health New Zealand employees.
Uh, there are approximately 50, 60,000 clinicians,
um, uh, many
of whom are doctors employed by Health New Zealand.
How many of them in, uh, would you estimate?
I know you won't have ex uh, exact figures, uh, are either
advising the minister or working on documents
that go to the minister?
Um, I wouldn't have numbers,
but, um, I, I,
I probably could count in the tens would be
that my, my thought.
Um, the thing about that is that, um, even with this
Piro Act bill, you know, we are a body of 18 colleges
with 36 of us who meet regularly,
and we didn't hear anything about it until it had gone
through, um, the recommended Asians had gone through.
So we are not providing advice,
and there's probably a small number who are,
and it would be a small number. Yeah.
And thank you. So conversely, the concern that you have,
that there might be a, um, uh, uh, suppression of,
um, doctors being able to raise their voice in public about,
uh, safety issues.
Can, can you give an example of, um, a time
where a doctor has spoken out about a safety
issue in the New Zealand health system that's led to
a positive change for, for patients?
I think, um, there's probably,
over the years there's been many examples where, um,
there has been issues.
I mean, it's like, um, let, let's say housing.
So, um, there's been a lot of evidence around, um, housing
for patients
and how it's really important that they have,
um, healthy homes.
And it has actually made a difference
to how we do change things.
And that is a political decision to be made.
And if there's politicians who are not focused on housing,
then they're going against
what is actually good for patients.
So for um, clinicians to be able to speak up
and say, this is an issue that is causing harm
to patients is really important.
Even if it is against political, um, focus at the time, um,
it still means that we, um, need to be able to say,
this needs to change and our government needs to change it
because we can't change what housing happens to housing,
but government has the power.
And if we are unable to say the government needs
to change things or what they're doing is not helping, then
that would be have a detrimental effect on patients.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much, uh,
for, for your submission.
Appreciate the time you've taken both, uh,
to put together a written submission
and also for your oral, oral presentation.
Um, we will now move to our next submitter, which is Awa
AWA Charitable Trust.
Uh, if, if they're online, if they can accept the prompt
to become, um, panelists, that would be great.
Excellent. I see we have, uh, hour, hour on, uh, online.
Um, welcome to the Health Select Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing this, uh, subcommittee
of the Health Select Committee.
We have a number of members online
and also our officials online.
We do have your written submission.
Um, and I'll ha we've allocated 10 minutes
for your oral presentation.
Um, I'll hand it 10 minutes to you now,
Uh, 10, uh, committee,
uh, thank you very much for this opportunity to present
before you, uh, like, uh, the previous submitter
and that we also feel that in its current form
we oppose the amendment bill
and recommend that it actually be abandoned
and that for a number of reasons.
But due to time, what I will do is focus on,
uh, just a few things.
So the first thing for us is in and around.
So we are a kto organization representing a group
that supports kto in their wellbeing.
And one thing that stuck out for our komar
and for us as an organization is the, uh, removal
of RA as the main thing for the name.
And there is one feature that we are going
to focus on today.
So, uh, the question is really, Maori health equity
is an issue then Maori health equity
as a priority is not shown in the removal of the priority
of the name of URA representing us as, as Maori
and the significance of Maori health for our country.
And that, which of course at this moment,
as our previous speakers said, the inequities
and the challenges for the health system to address some
of those inequities and cater to those that are high needs,
uh, patients within our health system, uh,
we believe will not be addressed by the amendments of this.
This particular bill in particular, uh, some
of the key things for us is in
and around removing local Maori voices in
health decision making.
So we believe that reducing the
of Iwi Maori partnership boards really does bring a watering
down of the voices of those who have lived experience.
So one of the disappointments we have is, um,
like the Honorable Tracy Martin is the absence
of any reference to our growing aging population, uh,
being a huge part of that.
And what we also note is that the cost of
our growing aging population on the health system requires
it to be addressed if our country
and its health system is to thrive.
And so we acknowledge
that there is another point within the, uh, amendments bill,
and that is in and around infrastructure.
So we acknowledge that infrastructure is hugely important,
giving our aging health system the aging infrastructure
that we currently have to serve a growing aging population.
And that, but we also note that within our community,
there's also a need to keep our coma well.
So a reflection of
that infrastructure is also really important
if healthy futures or RA is actually the goal.
So, uh, that's something that we felt needs to be addressed.
The sense of the amendment bill is that
whilst there is a intent to improve the quality
of the health system, uh,
generally across the population, we feel that as Maori,
that there's a real dilution of the presence of the type
of information that our health system requires
to make the changes
and to be responsive in an effective and timely manner.
And that, so that for us, uh, are really key issues,
um, making Maori providers an option as opposed
to an essential necessity for our,
for supporting our Maori population.
We also feel is a slight, in terms of the mahi
that's been done so far,
and the mahi that's yet to be done, that also fails
to acknowledge the role that Maori health providers played
during COVID, which of course,
what had a huge impact for our health system.
So building on lived experiences,
proven successes is something that we feel that,
that this amendment bill also misses.
I think renaming anything with a budget that has,
is really restricted, is a huge costly,
um, initiative.
And so to undertake that in a time of,
of restricted resources, uh, for us comes across
as extremely wasteful, Mr.
Chairman. And so on that note, uh, we are really happy
to receive any question.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much.
Uh, do we have any questions from the, the committee?
No, there does, doesn't seem to be, uh,
but we do have, um, we do have your written submission
and you did outline your concerns very clearly, um,
in your oral presentation.
So I do just want to thank you for the time
and effort you've put in to submit on this bill.
So thank you. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, we now will be moving
to the next submitter, which I do believe is Kerry Nuku, uh,
from Teki Mu Iwi Maori Partnership Board.
Excellent. Kerry, welcome. Um,
and Lewis, I think we've, is is there as well.
Uh, welcome to the
subcommittee of the Health State Committee.
I'm Hamish Campbell. I'm chairing this, uh, session.
Uh, we have your written submission.
Uh, we have allocated 10 minutes for your, um,
oral, oral presentation.
Um, and I appreciate the flexibility you have had in, uh,
timing to come before us today.
So thank you very much. Um,
I'll hand the time over to you now.
Oh, uh,
um, always a hard spot this afternoon, so thank you
for making the, the time and we'll try to keep it short
and probably to the point.
Um, as you said, my name is Louis today, along
with my co-chair, Kerry.
Kerry, we are pleased to present our submission to you as TE
Partnership Board, which is the IMPB for Hawkes Bay Te Maui.
So I'm gonna hand over to my colleague to talk to you, but
before I do, but just like to ask you to take a moment
to think about someone you may have known
that died far too soon from cancer, stroke,
heart attack, or suicide.
And I'll come back to that at the end.
Uh, we do not recommend that this bill progresses.
Um, further, we maintain the current role
and the function of IBS
and promote a strategic reset,
which leverages the lessons learned along
with the strengths, capabilities, trust, relationships,
and momentum that temu
and other IBS have established in their respective regions.
Um, we do thank you for taking the time to read
and hear our submissions.
Our hope no, our intent was
to take a constructive approach
to the Bill's proposed changes while we maintain
undeterred about the finding solutions that will create
real change for the health of our whanau
legislative tinkering
with an emphasis on a top down structural change
is a backward step.
It can't, it can't possibly deliver better results.
Our own experience just serves to reinforce that system-wide
restructures like the one proposed here just leads
to more confusion, loss of focus for delivery locally,
regionally, and nationally.
Our first community health plan published last December,
identified 23 priorities, key priorities for whanau.
Nine months later, these priorities are still waiting.
Effective delivery. It certainly is not
because these issues are waiting to be seen
or heard at Health New Zealand, as the minister has said,
let's get the basics right first.
The problem or the main problems we've seen are operational
poor digital infrastructure, access to timely data
capacity and capability issues, limited role clarity
and accountability for results, um,
which we're requiring improved collaboration on the ground.
Narrowing the focus of IBS to capturing whanau voice
with no influence
and accountability will leave us an impossible situation.
Capturing whanau voice comes with trust
and expectations for improvement.
We cannot achieve that through the proposed change
where we simply report back to the Maori authority
and hope for the best.
Hope is not a plan in a relatively short period.
We've built deep local knowledge, identified the barriers
to effectiveness and established strong
and trusted relationships, which we expect
to create meaningful changes in the near future.
Along with local collaborate collaborators,
we've found clever ways around
to accelerate transformational change
and better health outcomes for whanau.
But we've also found our role is not just to advocate
for whanau within the health system.
We have a wider role
to play in helping promote better health
and working with partners and collaborators both inside
and outside of the system to achieve better health outcomes.
These include local employers, post treaty,
settlement groups, local authorities and others.
We need to retain these strengths
and build on this momentum.
Maintain our current IMPB roles
with strategic commissioning,
but with a strategic reset in particular,
capture the lessons learned, accelerate
innovation and problem solving, identify
and remove barriers to delivery locally,
regionally, and nationally.
Encourage collaboration on bigger issues.
We can't, we cannot stand by
and allow the progress we've achieved to be lost.
The proposed amendments will entrench Maori health
inequities and undermine Maori rights.
We have a duty to our whanau to do the best
for them and their wellbeing.
We are strongly motivated, invested,
and the cap incapable of continuing to lead
and influence, which is a vital next step Kilda.
Thanks Kerry. I guess to come back to my question
around losing people far too soon with early mortality,
it's critical that communities are involved in
how services are designed
and delivered in those communities.
The proposal to centralized whanau voice
to a national advisory committee removes our ability to work
with communities, providers, and commissioners locally.
Our partnership with the Regional Economic Development
Agency to identify access barriers for working age Maori
that costs our local economy, 122 do $22 million per annum.
An example of a local cross sector collaboration.
So how do we ensure we have a prospering local community
here in Hawke's Bay where every au thrive if the only
regional voice is left, has been nationalized.
So, Quin,
Excellent. Thank you very much
for your submission.
I see Aisha's got a hand up, so over to you Aisha.
Yeah. Uh, thank you to you both for the submission.
Uh, and thank you for in your written submission linking
through to your, um, just get the name
of this, right, your program plan that the IMPB set up.
And there's incredibly practical things in there about
mobile dental services, uh, growing the number
of vaccinators, uh, work on mental health and addiction.
Um, you know, a short list of practical things
that you wanted to do for the, um, uh,
community in your, how will your ability
to do those things be impacted by this bill?
Well, essentially what will, it's, it's probably less, um,
Asia around the plans
because I think if we go back over the last decade or two
and look at some of the oral health plans
and some of these other plans, we have a lot
of plans in this particular system around things that doing
what we think is really important.
And our focus, as we've seen in our previous documents,
is the monitoring or to,
and the health system on delivering to those plans.
So the plans are great
and, um, of course what we've, um, done with our plan
and analysis of all those other plans and the au voice.
But I think what's critical
for us in this piece within the system is how do we monitor
to ensure that the health system is delivering on the plans
that it's already got.
And, um, that's where we believe our effort needs to happen.
And so with this change,
we don't have a monitoring function.
We can't talk to our local commissioners
and services to say, how are you delivering on those plans?
And this is what we are seeing on the ground.
Thank you. That's very practical. Thanks.
Excellent. Thank, thank you very much.
I'd just like to thank you both for, um,
for your submission, uh,
both your written and oral submission.
So thank, thank you. Thank you very much for taking the time
to come and present to the committee.
Excellent. For, um, the committee members online,
if we could just, um, jump into our private session, um,
that, that is our last submitters for today.
Um, if we could just jump into the private
session for consideration.
Appreciated.